CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

_👈 back to [README.md](./README.md)_

---

🙏 Thank you for your interest in contribution!

We ask that you please review these guidelines prior to making a PR. Otherwise there are no restrictions on who may contribute to the System.

Long term, Design System is intended to be maintained collaboratively by every engineer and designer at FireHydrant.

---

- [1. Branches](#1-branches)
- [2. Pull Requests](#2-pull-requests)
- [3. Conventional Commit](#3-conventional-commit)
  - [3.1. Commit messages](#31-commit-messages)
  - [3.2. CHANGELOG](#32-changelog)
  - [3.3. semver](#33-semver)
    - [3.3.1. major](#331-major)
    - [3.3.2. minor](#332-minor)
    - [3.3.3. patch](#333-patch)
- [4. Release process](#4-release-process)
  - [4.1. run release](#41-run-release)
  - [4.2. Misc.](#42-misc)
- [5. Deploy](#5-deploy)
  - [5.1. Storybook](#51-storybook)
  - [5.2. Playroom](#52-playroom)

---

# 1. Branches

| Branch     | Type           | Notes                                                        |
| ---------- | -------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `main`     | release        | **Avoid** pushing directly to this branch. Squash-merge PRs. |
| `gh-pages` | auto-generated | Deploys [Playroom ↗️][playroom] to GitHub pages              |
| `next`     | future work    | Reserved. Only work deemed "not for public"                  |

# 2. Pull Requests

Work should be done on branch names generated by Clubhouse (e.g. `<username>/<ch####>/<ticket-name>`).

Pull Requests should target `main` and be squash-merged.

1. File a ticket in [Clubhouse ↗️][clubhouse]
2. Obtain branch name via [Git Helper ↗️](https://help.clubhouse.io/hc/en-us/articles/207540323-Using-Branches-and-Pull-Requests-with-the-Clubhouse-VCS-Integrations)
3. Push to designated branch
4. Open Pull Request in GitHub (PR should target `main`)
5. Obtain necessary review(s)
6. Squash & Merge to `main`

# 3. Conventional Commit

This project abides by the [Conventional Commit ↗](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/) standard. These commit messages are then used by [`conventional-changelog/standard-version` ↗️](https://github.com/conventional-changelog/standard-version) to generate a well-formed CHANGELOG and determine the appropriate [semver ↗️](https://semver.org/) version bump automatically on [`release`](#41-run-release).

An `npm` postinstall script will automatically add a `.gitmessage` template to your `gitconfig --local` which will provide conventional commit documentation for every `git commit`.

_NOTE: single line commit messages (`git commit -m <message>`) will bypass this template_

## 3.1. Commit messages

In order to generate a CHANGELOG, commit history on the `main` branch needs to be formatted in a specific pattern.

The commit message squash-merged to `main` **must follow this pattern**, every other commit on the PR however, does not though we do recommend it as best practice.

```bash
[type](optional scope): [title of commit]

# example
feat(button): secondary outline button variant
```

- `type`: feat, fix, chore, docs, style, refactor, perf, test
- `scope`: (optional) a noun describing any section of the codebase _(e.g. button, config)_ surrounded by parenthesis
- `title`: brief description; 50 characters or less

## 3.2. CHANGELOG

CHANGELOG gets generated on `release` according to git history. Only `feat:` and `fix:` commits (and their commit messages) appear in the CHANGELOG; other types do not not.

💡 Commit types added to CHANGELOG [can be configured ↗️](https://github.com/conventional-changelog/conventional-changelog-config-spec/blob/master/versions/2.1.0/README.md#types) by altering the `standard-version` stanza in `package.json`.

## 3.3. semver

The appropriate version to bump according to the [semver ↗️](https://semver.org/) spec is automatically determined as part of [`release`](#41-run-release) based on git commit message history.

- [major](#331-major) (`x.0.0`) - including `BREAKING CHANGE:` in your commit message
- [minor](#332-minor) (`0.x.0`) - `fix:` & `feat:` types
- [patch](#333-patch) (`0.0.x`) - `chore:` and other types

### 3.3.1. major

Including `BREAKING CHANGE:` anywhere in the commit message triggers major (`x.0.0`) version bumps during [`release`](#41-run-release).

```
fix(scale): adjusts scale by 1 to start at 0px

BREAKING CHANGE: Scale shift affects all uses of scale in style props.
```

### 3.3.2. minor

`fix:` or `feat:` commit message types trigger minor (`0.x.0`) version bumps during [`release`](#41-run-release).

```
feat(button): secondary outline button variant
```

### 3.3.3. patch

All other commit types such as `chore:` trigger patch (`0.0.x`) version bumps during [`release`](#41-run-release).

```
chore: update out of date npm dependencies
```

# 4. Release process

Bumping the version according to [semver ↗️](https://semver.org/) and updating the CHANGELOG is handled by [`conventional-changelog/standard-version` ↗️](https://github.com/conventional-changelog/standard-version).

## 4.1. run release

Assuming you have practiced [healthy commit history](#31-commit-messages), start the process with:

```bash
npm run release
```

This task will build production assets, bump `version` in `package.json`, update `CHANGELOG`, add a `chore: release` commit, and `git tag` the commit with the version.

## 4.2. Misc.

1. bump the version in `package.json`
2. update [CHANGELOG.md](./CHANGELOG.md)

```bash
npm run build
npm publish --tag latest
```

# 5. Deploy

In addition to a semantic versioned package, this project also deploys two web applications automatically:

[![Storybook](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/storybooks/brand/master/badge/badge-storybook.svg)][storybook]
[![Playroom](https://img.shields.io/badge/playroom-live-000)][playroom]

## 5.1. [Storybook][storybook]

On push, every branch is configured to automatically build & deploy to [Chromatic ↗️][chromatic] via ["Chromatic" GitHub Workflow](./.github/workflows/chromatic.yml).

## 5.2. [Playroom][playroom]

On push to `main`, Playroom is automatically built to `docs/`, pushed to branch: `gh-pages`, and deployed to GitHub Pages via ["Build & Deploy Playroom" GitHub Workflow](./.github/workflows/playroom.yml).

---

[chromatic]: https://www.chromatic.com/builds?appId=607731addb01d30021caeac2
[clubhouse]: https://app.clubhouse.io/firehydrant/project/18818/design-system
[playroom]: https://firehydrant.github.io/design-system/
[storybook]: https://main--607731addb01d30021caeac2.chromatic.com/

Commit message:

docs(contributing): Release steps
Adds release documentation.

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

_👈 back to [README.md](./README.md)_

---

🙏 Thank you for your interest in contribution!

We ask that you review these guidelines prior to making a Pull Request (PR). Otherwise, there are no restrictions on who may contribute to the System.

Design System is intended to be maintained collaboratively by every engineer and designer at FireHydrant.

---

- [1. Branches](#1-branches)
- [2. Pull Requests](#2-pull-requests)
- [3. Conventional Commit](#3-conventional-commit)
  - [3.1. Commit messages](#31-commit-messages)
  - [3.2. CHANGELOG](#32-changelog)
  - [3.3. semver](#33-semver)
    - [3.3.1. major](#331-major)
    - [3.3.2. minor](#332-minor)
    - [3.3.3. patch](#333-patch)
- [4. Release process](#4-release-process)
  - [4.1. release](#41-release)
  - [4.2. push & publish](#42-push--publish)
- [5. Deploy secondary apps](#5-deploy-secondary-apps)
  - [5.1. Storybook](#51-storybook)
  - [5.2. Playroom](#52-playroom)

---

# 1. Branches

| Branch     | Type           | Notes                                                        |
| ---------- | -------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `main`     | release        | **Avoid** pushing directly to this branch. Squash-merge PRs. |
| `gh-pages` | auto-generated | Deploys [Playroom ↗️][playroom] to GitHub pages              |
| `next`     | future work    | Reserved. Only work deemed "not for public"                  |

# 2. Pull Requests

Work should be done on branch names generated by Clubhouse (e.g. `<username>/<ch####>/<ticket-name>`).

Pull Requests should target `main` and be squash-merged.

1. File a ticket in [Clubhouse ↗️][clubhouse]
2. Obtain branch name via [Git Helper ↗️](https://help.clubhouse.io/hc/en-us/articles/207540323-Using-Branches-and-Pull-Requests-with-the-Clubhouse-VCS-Integrations)
3. Push to designated branch
4. Open Pull Request in GitHub (PR should target `main`)
5. Obtain necessary review(s)
6. Squash & Merge to `main`

# 3. Conventional Commit

This project abides by the [Conventional Commit ↗](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/) standard. These commit messages are then used by [`conventional-changelog/standard-version` ↗️](https://github.com/conventional-changelog/standard-version) to generate a well-formed CHANGELOG and determine the appropriate [semver ↗️](https://semver.org/) version bump automatically on [`release`](#41-run-release).

An `npm` postinstall script will automatically add a `.gitmessage` template to your `gitconfig --local` which will provide conventional commit documentation for every `git commit`.

_NOTE: single line commit messages (`git commit -m <message>`) will bypass this template_

## 3.1. Commit messages

In order to generate a CHANGELOG, commit history on the `main` branch needs to be formatted in a specific pattern.

The commit message squash-merged to `main` **must follow this pattern**. Any other commit on the Pull Request does not need to comply, though we recommend it as best practice.

```bash
[type](optional scope): [title of commit]

# example
feat(button): secondary outline button variant
```

- `type`: feat, fix, chore, docs, style, refactor, perf, test
- `scope`: (optional) a noun describing any section of the codebase _(e.g. button, config)_ surrounded by parenthesis
- `title`: brief description; 50 characters or less

## 3.2. CHANGELOG

CHANGELOG gets generated on `release` according to git history. Only `feat:` and `fix:` commits (and their commit messages) appear in the CHANGELOG; other types do not not.

💡 Commit types added to CHANGELOG [can be configured ↗️](https://github.com/conventional-changelog/conventional-changelog-config-spec/blob/master/versions/2.1.0/README.md#types) by altering the `standard-version` stanza in `package.json`.

## 3.3. semver

The appropriate version to bump according to the [semver ↗️](https://semver.org/) spec is automatically determined as part of [`release`](#41-run-release) based on git commit message history.

- [major](#331-major) (`x.0.0`) - including `BREAKING CHANGE:` in your commit message
- [minor](#332-minor) (`0.x.0`) - `fix:` & `feat:` types
- [patch](#333-patch) (`0.0.x`) - `chore:` and other types

### 3.3.1. major

Including `BREAKING CHANGE:` anywhere in the commit message triggers major (`x.0.0`) version bumps during [`release`](#41-run-release).

```
fix(scale): adjusts scale by 1 to start at 0px

BREAKING CHANGE: Scale shift affects all uses of scale in style props.
```

### 3.3.2. minor

`fix:` or `feat:` commit message types trigger minor (`0.x.0`) version bumps during [`release`](#41-run-release).

```
feat(button): secondary outline button variant
```

### 3.3.3. patch

All other commit types such as `chore:` trigger patch (`0.0.x`) version bumps during [`release`](#41-run-release).

```
chore: update out of date npm dependencies
```

# 4. Release process

Bumping the version according to [semver ↗️](https://semver.org/) and updating the CHANGELOG is handled by [`conventional-changelog/standard-version` ↗️](https://github.com/conventional-changelog/standard-version).

💡 Release should only be conducted from an up-to-date `main` branch. (Squash-merge PRs with correctly formatted [commit messages](#31-commit-messages))

## 4.1. release

```bash
npm run release
```

💡 Builds production assets, bumps version in `package.json`, updates CHANGELOG, adds a `chore: release` commit, and adds a `git tag` with the (new) current version.

**dry-run**

Running `release` with the --dry-run flag allows you to see what runs, see a preview of CHANGELOG changes, without committing to git or updating files.

```bash
npm run release -- --dry-run
```

## 4.2. push & publish

After [`release`](#41-run-release) has finished without error, push to remote & publish the package.

```bash
git push --follow-tags origin main && npm publish
```

# 5. Deploy secondary apps

In addition to a semantic versioned package, this project also deploys two web applications automatically:

[![Storybook](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/storybooks/brand/master/badge/badge-storybook.svg)][storybook]
[![Playroom](https://img.shields.io/badge/playroom-live-000)][playroom]

## 5.1. [Storybook][storybook]

On push, every branch is configured to automatically build & deploy to [Chromatic ↗️][chromatic] via ["Chromatic" GitHub Workflow](./.github/workflows/chromatic.yml).

## 5.2. [Playroom][playroom]

On push to `main`, Playroom is automatically built to `docs/`, pushed to branch: `gh-pages`, and deployed to GitHub Pages via ["Build & Deploy Playroom" GitHub Workflow](./.github/workflows/playroom.yml).

---

[chromatic]: https://www.chromatic.com/builds?appId=607731addb01d30021caeac2
[clubhouse]: https://app.clubhouse.io/firehydrant/project/18818/design-system
[playroom]: https://firehydrant.github.io/design-system/
[storybook]: https://main--607731addb01d30021caeac2.chromatic.com/
